---
layout: simple
title: Groups Part Memory Sheet
---

#### Based on the notes and lectures of [Prof. David Evans](https://www.ma.imperial.ac.uk/~dmevans/?_gl=1*770mhm*_ga*NTkyNDQ0MjkxLjE2OTA0NTE4MjA.*_ga_LME5ZDDFS0*MTY5MDc0NDkyOC4yOC4xLjE2OTA3NDY0NDYuNTguMC4w) and [Dr. Michele Zordan](https://mzordan.com).

## 1. Groups and Subgroups

### Definition (Order of a group)

We say that a group 

$$
(G,.)
$$
is a finite group if the set $$G$$ is a finite set. In this case, the order of $$(G,.)$$ is

$$
|G|
$$

the number of elements in the group.

### Theorem (The order of a symmetric group)

If $$ n \in \mathbb{N} $$, then

$$
|S_{n}|=n!
$$

### Theorem 1.16. (Test for a subgroup)

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a group and $$H \subseteq G$$. Then $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$ if and only if

(1) $$H \neq \emptyset$$

(2) for all $$h_{1}, h_{2} \in H$$ we have $$h_{1} h_{2} \in H$$ (closure under the group operation);

(3) for all $$h \in H$$ we have $$h^{-1} \in H$$ (closure under inverses).

### Definition

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a group and $$g \in G$$. The cyclic subgroup generated by $$g$$ is $$\langle g\rangle=\left\{g^{m}: m \in \mathbb{Z}\right\}$$.

### Example of cyclic groups

- $$
K=\left\{\left(\begin{array}{cc}
\cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\
\sin \theta & \cos \theta
\end{array}\right): \theta \in \mathbb{R}\right\} \leq \mathrm{GL}_{2}(\mathbb{R})
$$

Note $$K$$ consists of linear maps $$\mathbb{R}^{2} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$$ given by rotations about 0 . The subgroup $$K$$ is abelian, but not cyclic (for example, $$K$$ is uncountable, whereas any cyclic group is countable).

(3) We have:

$$
2 \mathbb{Z} \leq \mathbb{Z} \leq \mathbb{Q} \leq \mathbb{R} \leq(\mathbb{C},+)
$$

where $$2 \mathbb{Z}$$ consists of the even integers. Note that $$\mathbb{Z}=\langle 1\rangle$$ and $$2 \mathbb{Z}=\langle 2\rangle$$ are cyclic, but none of the other groups is cyclic.

(4) Consider the unit circle in the complex plane:

$$
U=\left\{e^{i \theta}: \theta \in \mathbb{R}\right\}=\{z \in \mathbb{C}:|z|=1\}=\{z \in \mathbb{C}: z \bar{z}=1\}
$$

This is a subgroup of $$\left(\mathbb{C}^{\times},.\right)$$, the multiplicative group of the field of complex numbers. It is abelian, but not cyclic.

Puzzle: What is the relationship to the group $$K$$ in (2)?

(5) Let $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$ and $$\zeta=e^{2 \pi i / n} \in \mathbb{C}^{\times}$$. So $$\zeta^{n}=1$$. Then $$\langle\zeta\rangle \leq U$$ and

$$
\langle\zeta\rangle=\left\{1, \zeta, \zeta^{2}, \ldots, \zeta^{n-1}\right\}
$$

is a cyclic group of order $$n$$.

### Definition (Order of an element)

Suppose $$G$$ is a group and $$g \in G$$. We say that $$g$$ has finite order if there is $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$ (with $$n \geq 1$$) such that $$g^{n}=e$$. In this case, the least such $$n$$ with $$g^{n}=e$$ is called the order of $$g$$, denoted by $$\operatorname{ord}(g)$$. If there is no such $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$, we say that $$g$$ has infinite order.

### Theorem

Suppose $$G$$ is a group and $$g \in G$$ has finite order $$n$$. Then:

(1) For $$m, l \in \mathbb{Z}$$ we have

$$
g^{l}=g^{m} \Leftrightarrow n \mid(l-m) \Leftrightarrow l \equiv m(\bmod n)
$$

(2) In particular, $$g^{m}=e \Leftrightarrow n \mid m$$.

(3) We have 
$$
 \langle g\rangle=\{e, g, g^{2}, \ldots, g^{n-1}\}$$ and $$|\langle g\rangle|=n
$$.

So 

$$
\operatorname{ord}(g)=|\langle g\rangle|
$$

### Theorem

Suppose $$G$$ is a finite group.

(1) Every element of $$G$$ has finite order.

(2) If $$H \subseteq G$$ is a non-empty subset of $$G$$ and for all $$h_{1}, h_{2} \in H$$ we have $$h_{1} h_{2} \in H$$, then $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$.

### Theorem 

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a cyclic group and $$G=\langle g\rangle$$.

(1) If $$H \leq G$$, then $$H$$ is cyclic.

(2) Suppose

$$
|G|=n
$$

(that is, $$g$$ has order $$n$$), and $$m \in \mathbb{Z}$$. Let

$$
d=\operatorname{gcd}(m, n)
$$

the greatest common divisor of $$m$$ and $$n$$. Then

$$
\left\langle g^{m}\right\rangle=\left\langle g^{d}\right\rangle \text { and }\left|\left\langle g^{d}\right\rangle\right|=n / d
$$

In particular,

$$
\left\langle g^{m}\right\rangle=G \Leftrightarrow \operatorname{gcd}(m, n)=1
$$

(3) If

$$
|G|=n
$$
and 

$$
k \leq n
$$

then $$G$$ has a subgroup of order $$k$$ if and only if $$ k \mid n $$. In this case, the subgroup is

$$
\langle g^{n / k}\rangle
$$.

### Definition (Euler totient function)

For $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$, the Euler totient function $$\phi(n)$$ is

$$
\mid\{k \in \mathbb{N}: 1 \leq k \leq n \text { and } \operatorname{gcd}(k, n)=1\} \mid
$$

For a cyclic group $$G = \langle g \rangle$$ of order $$n$$, there are $$\phi(n)$$ generators of $$G$$, which means there $$\phi(n)$$ integers $$m$$ with $$1 \leq m \leq n$$ and $$\operatorname{gcd}(m, n)=1$$ such that $$G = \langle g^m \rangle$$.

The totient function is multiplicative on prime decompositions $$
ϕ(35) =
ϕ(7)ϕ(5) = 6 · 4 = 24
$$

If $$p$$ is a prime number, then $$\phi(p)=p-1$$.

## Lagrange's Theorem and Cosets

### Theorem(Lagrange's Theorem) 

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a finite group and $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$. Then

$$
|H| \text { divides }|G|
$$

### Theorem

Suppose $$G$$ is a finite group of order $$n$$. Let $$g \in G$$. Then:

(1) The order of $$g$$ divides $$n$$. i.e. $$k \:ord($$g$$) = n$$ for some $$k \in \mathbb{N}$$ with $$k \mid n$$.

(2) If $$g^{m}=e$$, then $$m$$ divides $$n$$.

(3) $$g^{n}=e$$.

### Theorem (The group with prime order is cyclic)

Suppose $$p$$ is a prime and $$G$$ is group of order $$p$$. Then $$G$$ is cyclic. In fact, if $$e \neq g \in G$$, then $$\langle g\rangle=G$$.

### Definition (Left coset)

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a group and $$ H \leq G $$. Let $$g \in G$$. The subset

$$
g H=\{g h: h \in H\} \subseteq G
$$

is called a left coset of $$H$$ in $$G$$. (Sometimes we will say 'left $$H$$-coset.')

### Lemma

Suppose $$(G,$$.$$) is a group and H \leq G$$.

(1) If $$g_{1}, g_{2} \in G$$ and $$g_{2} \in g_{1} H$$, then $$g_{2} H=g_{1} H$$.

(2) If $$g, k \in G$$ and $$g H \cap k H \neq \emptyset$$, then $$g H=k H$$.

### Definition (Index of a subgroup)

The number of left cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$ is called the index of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

### Theorem (Lagrange's Theorem)

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ is a finite group,

$$
|G : H|
$$

means the number of distinct left cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$, and

$$
|G|
$$

is the order of $$G$$, then

$$
|G|=|G : H| \cdot|H|
$$

## 3. Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms
### Definition (Homomorphism)

Suppose $$(G,.)$$ and $$(H,.)$$ are groups.

(1) A function $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ is a homomorphism if for all $$g_{1}, g_{2} \in G$$ we have

$$
\phi\left(g_{1} g_{2}\right)=\phi\left(g_{1}\right) \phi\left(g_{2}\right)
$$

[Note that on the left hand side here, the product $$g_{1} g_{2}$$ uses the group operation in $$G$$ whereas on the right-hand side, the product $$\phi\left(g_{1}\right) \phi\left(g_{2}\right)$$ uses the group operation in $$H$$.]

(2) If $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ is a homomorphism, the image of $$\phi$$ is

$$
\operatorname{im} \phi=\{\phi(g): g \in G\}
$$

The kernel of $$\phi$$ is

$$
\operatorname{ker} \phi=\left\{g \in G: \phi(g)=e_{H}\right\}
$$

(3) If the homomorphism $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ is a bijection, then we say that $$\phi$$ is an isomorphism. We say that groups $$G, H$$ are isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$. In this case we write $$G \cong H$$.

### Examples
(1) (Trivial examples) Suppose $$G$$ is any group. The identity map $$i: G \rightarrow G$$ (with $$i(g)=g$$ for all $$g \in G$$) is an isomorphism.

If $$G, H$$ are groups, the map $$\psi: G \rightarrow H$$ with $$\psi(g)=e_{H}$$ for all $$g \in G$$ is a homomorphism.

(2) Suppose $$F$$ is a field and $$G=\operatorname{GL}(n, F)$$. The determinant map

$$
\operatorname{det}: G \rightarrow\left(F^{\times}, .\right)
$$

is a homomorphism, by the product formula $$\operatorname{det}\left(g_{1} g_{2}\right)=\operatorname{det}\left(g_{1}\right) \operatorname{det}\left(g_{2}\right)$$.

(3) Suppose $$(H,.)$$ is any group and $$h \in H$$. Define $$\phi:(\mathbb{Z},+) \rightarrow H$$ by $$\phi(n)=h^{n}$$, for $$n \in \mathbb{Z}$$. By the rules for exponents, we know that

$$
\phi(m+n)=h^{m+n}=h^{m} h^{n}=\phi(m) \phi(n)
$$

so $$\phi$$ is a homomorphism. The image of $$\phi$$ is $$\langle h\rangle$$. If $$h$$ has infinite order, then ker $$\phi=\{0\}$$. If $$h$$ has finite order $$n$$, then $$\operatorname{ker} \phi=n \mathbb{Z}$$.

(4) The exponential map

$$
\exp :(\mathbb{R},+) \rightarrow\left(\mathbb{R}^{>0}, .\right)
$$

is a homomorphism as $$\exp (x+y)=\exp (x) \exp (y)$$. As exp here is also a bijection, we have that it is an isomorphism (which may be a bit of a surprise as we would not normally think of the groups $$(\mathbb{R},+)$$ and $$(\mathbb{R}^{>0},.)$$ as being 'the same group').

(5) The modulus map

$$
|\cdot|:(\mathbb{C}^{\times},.) \rightarrow(\mathbb{R}^{\times},.)
$$

is a homomorphism with kernel 

$$
\{z \in \mathbb{C}^{\times}:|z|=1\}
$$

### Lemma

Suppose $$G, H, K$$ are groups.

(i) A homomorphism $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ is injective if and only if $$\operatorname{ker} \phi=e_{G}$$.

(ii) If $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ and $$\psi: H \rightarrow K$$ are homomorphisms, then the composition $$\psi \circ \phi: G \rightarrow K$$ is a homomorphism.

(iii) If $$\phi: G \rightarrow H$$ is an isomorphism, then the inverse map $$\phi^{-1}: H \rightarrow G$$ is also an isomorphism. (So if $$G \cong H$$, then $$H \cong G$$.)

### Theorem

(1) Suppose $$G, H$$ are cyclic groups of the same order. Then there is an isomorphism $$\alpha: G \rightarrow H$$.

(2) If $$V_{1}, V_{2}$$ are non-cyclic groups of order 4 , then $$V_{1} \cong V_{2}$$. 

## More on Symmetric Groups
### Definition (Fixed and Moved Points)
Let $$f, g \in S_{n}$$ and $$x \in[n]$$. We say that $$f$$ fixes $$x$$ if $$f(x)=x$$ and $$f$$ moves $$x$$ if $$f(x) \neq x$$. The support of $$f$$ is $$\{y \in[n]: f(y) \neq y\}$$. This is denoted by $$\operatorname{supp}(f)$$.

### Definition (r-cycles)
Let $$n \in \mathbb{N}$$ and $$r \leq n$$. Suppose $$i_{1}, \ldots, i_{r} \in[n]$$ are distinct. If $$f \in S_{n}$$ fixes the other elements of $$[n]$$ and

$$
f\left(i_{1}\right)=i_{2} ; f\left(i_{2}\right)=i_{3} ; \ldots, f\left(i_{r-1}\right)=i_{r} ; f\left(i_{r}\right)=i_{1}
$$

then $$f$$ is called an $$r$$-cycle (or a cycle of length $$r$$) and we write $$f$$ as $$\left(i_{1}, i_{2}, i_{3}, \ldots, i_{r}\right)$$ or (missing out the commas) $$\left(i_{1} i_{2} i_{3} \ldots i_{r}\right)$$.

### Theorem (Every permutation is a product of disjoint cycles)
If $$f \in S_{n}$$, then there exist cycles $$f_{1}, f_{2}, \ldots, f_{k} \in S_{n}$$ with disjoint supports such that $$f=f_{1} f_{2} \ldots f_{k}$$.

The factorisation is not unique in general. For example, if $$n=3$$, then $$\left(1,2,3\right)=\left(1,2\right)\left(2,3\right)=\left(1,3\right)\left(1,2\right)\left(2,3\right)$$.

### Definition (Cycle Shape)
The cycle shape of a permutation $$f \in S_{n}$$ is the sequence of cycle lengths in descending order, including repetitions and fixed points, when it is written in disjoint cycle

Note: The number of $$r$$-cycles on a set of size $$r$$ is $$\frac{1}{r} r !$$. This is because we have $$r$$ ! ways of writing the $$r$$ elements as a sequence $$i_{1}, i_{2}, \ldots, i_{r}$$ and each $$r$$-cycle can be represented in $$r$$ different ways

$$
\left(i_{1}, i_{2}, \ldots, i_{r}\right)=\left(i_{2}, \ldots, i_{r}, i_{1}\right)=\ldots=\left(i_{r}, i_{1}, i_{2}, \ldots, i_{r-1}\right)
$$

Thus the number of distinct $$r$$-cycles on a set of size $$n \geq r$$ is

$$
\left(\begin{array}{l}
n \\
r
\end{array}\right) \frac{1}{r} r !=\frac{n !}{r(n-r) !} .
$$

###Theorem
Suppose $$g \in S_{n}$$ is written in disjoint cycle form as $$g=g_{1} g_{2} \ldots g_{k}$$ where $$g_{i}$$ is an $$r_{i}$$-cycle (for $$i=1, \ldots, k$$) and $$g_{1}, \ldots, g_{k}$$ are disjoint. If $$m \in \mathbb{N}$$, then:

(i) $$g^{m}=g_{1}^{m} g_{2}^{m} \ldots g_{k}^{m}$$;

(ii) $$g^{m}=\iota \Leftrightarrow g_{i}^{m}=\iota$$ for all $$i=1, \ldots, k$$.

(iii) The order of $$g$$ is the least common multiple $$\operatorname{lcm}\left(r_{1}, \ldots, r_{k}\right)$$ of the lengths of the disjoint cycles in $$g$$.

(iv) $$g^{-1}=g_{1}^{-1} \ldots g_{k}^{-1}$$.

###Theorem (The order of Dihedral Groups)
The group $$G \leq S_{n}$$ of permutations induced on the vertices of a regular $$n$$-gon by symmetries of the $$n$$-gon has size $$2 n$$.

###Definition 
We let $$\operatorname{sgn}(f)=1$$ if $$f(\Delta)=\Delta$$ and $$\operatorname{sgn}(f)=-1$$ if $$f(\Delta)=-\Delta$$. Thus $$f(\Delta)=\operatorname{sgn}(f) \Delta$$.

###Theorem
Suppose $$n \geq 2$$ and $$f, g \in S_{n}$$.

(i) We have $$\operatorname{sgn}(f g)=\operatorname{sgn}(f) \operatorname{sgn}(g)$$, so $$\operatorname{sgn}: S_{n} \rightarrow \pm 1$$ is a homomorphism.

(ii) If $$f$$ is a 2 -cycle, then $$\operatorname{sgn}(f)=-1$$.

(iii) If $$g$$ is an $$r$$-cycle, then $$\operatorname{sgn}(g)=(-1)^{r-1}$$.

### Theorem
For every matrix $$A=\left(a_{i j}\right) \in M_{n}(F)$$ we have:

$$
\operatorname{det}(A)=\sum_{f \in S_{n}} \operatorname{sgn}(f) a_{1 f(1)} a_{2 f(2)} \ldots a_{n f(n)}
$$